Since some samples were taken from cores and others from the surface,
we first compared the variability of each set of core samples against
surface samples or samples from another core collected in the same
cave.  We used the Fligner-Killeen test of homogeneity of variances
(Fligner and Killeen, 1976) to determine that the variances among the
types of samples (core or surface) taken in a single cave or bat house
were not significantly different.  In addition, we checked samples
from the same core for systematic autocorrelation.  Given the lack of
significant differences in variability or systematic autocorrelation,
the following analysis does not distinguish between core samples and
surface samples taken from the same cave.

Figure 2 shows boxplots of the mercury concentrations separately for
samples taken in caves and in bat houses, along with the respective
sample sizes for each group.  Because more than five times as many
samples were collected in caves as in bat houses, a traditional
confidence interval for the overall mercury concentration across
locations would be dominated by the samples from the caves.  Instead,
we investigate differences among the individual caves and the bat
houses before proposing an estimation method.

Figure 3 shows the concentrations from caves, separated by location
and excluding caves with fewer than 3 samples.  Although ten caves
were surveyed, four of them had too few observations to ascertain the
mean or variability of mercury concentrations in that location.  (Only
one sample was taken from Big Mouth Cave and Newberry Bat Cave, and
only two samples were available from Thornton’s Cave and Waterfall
Cave).  Given the differences among the boxplots in Figure 3, it
appears that the means and variances of concentrations likely differ
between at least some of the caves.  Figure 4, which shows boxplots
for the samples from the two bat houses, also shows evidence of a
difference in mean and potentially variance.

Given the likelihood of heterogeneous variance, the traditional
analysis of variance (ANOVA) approach is excluded.  Instead, we use
generalized least squares (e.g. Sen and Srivastava, 1990, Chp. 6) to
fit a model which allows each individual cave and bat house to have
its own means and variance.  After fitting this model, we combine the
estimates (and the accompanying variability) to estimate the overall
mean concentration of mercury at all sites.  We then use linear
contrasts between the fitted means to estimate the difference in the
mean concentration in bat houses versus caves.

We first consider comparisons between caves.  With Tukey’s method of
adjusting for multiple comparisons, we conclude that there are
significant differences in mean mercury concentrations between Climax
Cave and Florida Caverns Old Indian Cave (p < 0.001) and between
Climax Cave and Judge’s Cave (p< 0.001).  The mean mercury
concentration in Florida Caverns Old Indian Cave is estimated to be
0.20 +/- 0.09 ppm higher than that in Climax Cave, while the mean in
Judge’s Cave is estimated to be 0.21 +/- 0.11 ppm higher.

The mean concentrations in the two bat houses are also significantly
different (p < 0.0001), with the mean at the bat house at Lower
Suwanee National Wildlife Reserve (NWR) estimated as 0.37 +/- 0.17 ppm
higher than that at the bat house at the University of Florida at
Gainesville.  Given the smaller sample sizes for the bat houses, the
validity of the normal distribution assumed in the model can be
reasonably be questioned.  However, the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney
non-parametric test procedure, which does not depend on the normality
assumption, provides additional evidence that the concentrations are
significantly different in the two bat houses (p < 0.001).  We note
that this aspect of the analysis would be improved by increasing the
number of samples from bat houses.  This would include increasing the
sample size from each bat house, particularly as we had only 5 samples
from the Lower Suwanee NWR bat house, or increasing the number of bat
houses from which samples were obtained.  The Lower Suwanee bat house
is a much smaller bat house than the bat house at University of
Florida at Gainesville, which has the largest occupied bat house in
the world and two structures for bat houses instead of the one
structure at Lower Suwanee.

Lastly, we used linear contrasts to estimate the difference in mean
concentrations between caves and bat houses.  The estimated means from
the six caves with sufficient numbers of observations were weighted
equally to obtain an estimate for the mean mercury concentration in
caves.  The estimates from the two available bat houses were also
weighted equally in determining the estimated concentration for bat
houses.  Using the estimates and their associated variability from our
generalized least squares model, we estimated the difference between
caves and bat houses as 0.04 +/ 0.07, which is not significant (p =
0.29).  To obtain an estimate of the overall mean concentration, we
assigned equal weight to the estimated mean for caves and the mean
obtained for bat houses.  This overall mean concentration was
estimated to 0.53 +/- 0.04 ppm.
